# Semantic Similarity Analysis Using BERT

This repository hosts the files used in a project comparing AI tools used for academic research. Specifically, semantic similarity analysis was performed on search results from different citation-mapping literature tools. The contents of the files are as follows:
- README.md: Instructions for setting up and running BERT
  The instructions assume that you are familiar with installing software packages and working in a command-line environment.
- test_bert.py: Python script for running a BERT smoke test
- compare_pdfs.py: Python script analyzing semantic similarity for two PDFs
- compare_

## Project Overview

The project methodology involves (1) given an identical search input, collecting search results from a collection of citation-based tools; (2) using well-established natural language processing (NLP) techniques to generate numeric representations of the search results; and (3) conducting a quantitative analysis of the search results to identify how similar or dissimilar the search results are across the tools.

BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) is a LLM that excels at National Language Processing (NLP) tasks such as sentiment analysis, question answering, and semantic similarity. A pre-trained BERT version, Sentence-Bert, is used to convert natural language text into tokens. The token representations are then provided as input to a transformer, which produces embeddings. Two embeddings, each representing a set of search results from one citation-based tool, are compared by calculating their cosine similarity score (a value between 0 and 1). The higher the score, the closer the results are semantically.

Similarity between two texts–or sets of search results–is useful as a comparative metric because it allows conclusions to be drawn regarding the consistency among various citation-based tools. For example, if tools A, B, and C generate similar search results, one can save time by not needing to run the same search in all three tools. This can save researchers valuable time and avoid efforts that are likely to result in similar or duplicative results. Otherwise, if tools A, B, and C don’t generate similar results, it could be worth reviewing the search results generated by each tool.

## System Requirements
Pytorch is an open source deep learning framework. One of its capabilities is enabling LLMs, such as BERT, to be run on a local computer. You can install Pytorch as well as a multitude of supported libraries at no cost. 

Before proceeding further, review the specified hardware and software requirements to see if your computer is able to run Pytorch.

Recommended hardware requirements:
- Computer with Nvidia GPU that supports CUDA or AMD GPU (optional if you will not be doing heavy computing)
- Intel Core i5 and higher or AMD Ryzen 7 and higher
- 8 GB RAM
- 256 GB storage

>[!NOTE]
The requirements were taken from (https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python/pytorch-system-requirements). Although the PyTorch website does not list specific hardware requirements, running LLMs requires a nontrivial amount of computing power.

Software requirements:
- For a list of supported operating systems, see the Pytorch website (https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/) and select your OS (Linux, Mac, Windows) listed on the interactive chart.

## Part 1: Set up and run BERT

To set up and run BERT, perform the following tasks in order:
1. [Install Python](#install-python).
2. [Set up a Python virtual environment](#set-up-a-python-virtual-environment).
3. [Install Pytorch](#install-pytorch).
4. [Install Hugging Face Transformers and dependencies](#install-hugging-face-transformers-and-dependencies).
5. [Run a BERT smoke test](#run-a-bert-smoke-test).
7. [Save BERT locally for offline use (optional)](#save-bert-locally-for-offline-use-optional).

### Install Python

Install Python from the official site (https://www.python.org/downloads/). Make sure to select the **Add python.exe to PATH** option on the install screen. pip, a package manager for Python, is automatically installed when using the official Python installer.

>[!IMPORTANT] 
Although Pytorch supports Python versions 3.10-3.14, it is recommended to install 3.10, as dependency issues in libraries can occur with later versions. 

### Set up a Python virtual environment

To set up a Python virtual environment:
1. In a command-line, create a project folder. E.g. `C:\projects\bert-local`
2. In the folder, run `python -m venv <env_name>` to create a virtual environment. E.g. `python -m venv .venv`
3. In the same folder, run `.\<env_name>\scripts\activate.bat` to activate the environment. E.g. `.\.venv\scripts\activate.bat`
  
### Install Pytorch

The package manager pip is used to install the PyTorch binaries. The command to install Pytorch in the virtual environment changeds based on the following factors:
- OS
- computing using a GPU or CPU
- GPU model (if applicable).

Use one of the following methods to find the correct command:
- If your GPU supports the latest CUDA SDKs and you want to install the latest stable Pytorch version, select your configuration using the interactive chart on (https://pytorch.org/get-started/locally/) and the command will be generated for you.
  <[!TIP]
  You can check your Nvidia driver version and CUDA version by runinng `nivida-smi` in a command-line.
- If your GPU supports earlier CUDA SDKs or you want to install an earlier Pytorch version, find the relevant command at (https://pytorch.org/get-started/previous-versions/).

The following is a sample command to install Pytorch: `pip install torch torchvision torchaudio --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu118`

>[!IMPORTANT]
Even if your GPU supports the latest CUDA SDKs, compatability issues still might occur when attemping to install the latest Pytorch CUDA wheels. You can use online LLMs such as ChatGPT to help you troubleshoot which CUDA wheel and Pytorch version to install, or you can choose to only use the CPU to compute and skip installing the CUDA wheel.

This project ran on a computer that has the Nivdiao Quadro T2000 GPU. After much trial and error, the final working configuration was:
Python version: 3.11.9
Pytorch version: 2.7.1
CUDA wheel: 11.8

### Install Hugging Face Transformers and dependencies

The Hugging Space Transformers library provides pre-trained LLMs that you can load in Pytorch. 

To install the library, in your activated virtual environment, run `pip install transformers`.

### Run a BERT smoke test

To run a BERT smoke test:
1. Create a file named `test_bert.py` containing the following code in your project folder:
```
from transformers import AutoTokenizer, AutoModel
import torch

tok = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")
model = AutoModel.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased").cuda()

inputs = tok("Hello from BERT on GPU!", return_tensors="pt").to("cuda")
outputs = model(**inputs)

print("BERT ran successfully on:", outputs.last_hidden_state.device)
```
2. In your activated virtual environment, run `python test_bert.py`.
   If BERT is successfully run, the returned output is "BERT ran successfully on: cuda:0".

### Save BERT locally for offline use (optional)
Hugging Face Transformers automatically caches model weights, configurations, and tokenizer data, so you can skip this task.

To save BERT locally for offline use:
1. After loading the model and tokenizer once, in your activated virtual environment, run `python` to invoke the Python interpretor as an interactive shell. This enables you to Python code line-by-line and see the results immediately.
   >{!TIP]
   Exit the interactive shell at any time by running `exit`.
2. Run the following commands:
```
save_dir = "./<model_directory>"
model.save_pretrained(save_dir)
tokenizer.save_pretrained(save_dir)
```
For example, the following commands save the model and tokenizer to a subdirectory of the current folder named `models/bert-case-uncased`.
```
save_dir = "./models/bert-base-uncased"
model.save_pretrained(save_dir)
tokenizer.save_pretrained(save_dir)
```
3. Later, you can load the model directly from the folder running the following commands in the Python interactive shell:
```
from transformers import BertTokenizer, BertModel
model_path = "./models/bert-base-uncased"
tokenizer = BertTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_path, local_files_only=True)
model = BertModel.from_pretrained(model_path, local_files_only=True)
```

## Part 2: Perform Semantic Similarity Analysis

Once you have BERT set up and running, you can use BERT for inference tasks. Two sample Python scripts are provided that extracts text from 2 sources, chunks it, generates embeddings, builds a document‑level embedding for each source text, and computes similarity between the two sources:
 - compare_pdfs.py
 - compare_csvs.py
These scripts uses the following model in the SentenceTransformers library: all-mpnet-base-v2

To perform semantic similarity analysis on two text sources: 
1. Prepare two text files for analysis.
2. In your activated virtual environment, run one of the provided Python scripts: `python <script_name> <text1_name> <text2_name>` E.g. python compare_pdfs.py pdf1 pdf2
  A Semantic Similarity score is produced.

## AI Use Disclosure
AI was used to generate the initial instructions for setting up BERT as well as code samples and scripts.
